think about this in your life have you
ever had a premonition of an event that
ended up happening you just kind of knew
something was going to happen before it
did these key elements in that dream
he'd had almost three decades earlier
came true in his life and he never
acknowledged that that dream was a
premonition maybe it was the passing of
a loved one thinking about somebody
right before they call or re-enter your
life having a gut feeling that you know
you need to quit that job take that
other job travel somewhere get back in
touch with someone even though it made
no rational sense to at the time it just
felt like a download you got a gut
feeling patients would bring him
precognitive dreams all the time because
people have these dreams all the time
have you ever had a dream that's turned
into a reality have you ever seen
somebody else predict an extremely low
probability Black Swan event with
bizarre precision and accuracy well if
you answered yes to any of these You are
not alone this happens literally all of
the time and thanks to this guy we're
discovering the science behind it right
now trying to predict the future is a
discouraging and hazardous
occupation but before we get into his
work and who he is let's go through all
of the insane examples of modern
prophecies American fiction author Dean
coun wrote a novel called The Eyes Of
Darkness it's centered on secret
experiments involving the perfect
bioweapon developed at a lab near Wuhan
China called Wuhan 400 the novel is set
in 2020 exactly like Co the only thing
is the novel was written in
1981 author Morgan Robertson wrote an
1898 Nolla called futility or wreck of
the Titan futility tells the story of
the Titan the largest and most luxurious
ocean liner ever built in the novel The
Titan hits an iceberg in the North
Atlantic on an April night and sinks but
before that catastrophe the ship was
described as Unsinkable and the largest
liner in the ocean ring a bell well
because wreck of the Titan was written
about 14 years before the Titanic the
most luxurious ocean liner built at the
time described as unsn able with Elite
families like the Asters on board both
ships were almost identical in size and
features the Titan was 800 ft long
whereas the Titanic was 882 ft long both
vessels were traveling at high speeds
around 24 to 25 knots while they were
crossing the North Atlantic in April at
the time of their collision with an
iceberg they both disregarded ice
warnings and both lacked a sufficient
amount of lifeboats on board in 1952
former Nazi and father of the American
Space Program wner Von braa published a
science fiction book titled project Mars
a technical Tale in this novel he
predicted a future mission to colonize
Mars led by a figure referred to as Elon
and what about this 1958 Western called
trackdown in which a man named Trump
with Magnetic Charisma and a cult-like
Following comes to a town promising to
save it by building a wall you ask how
do you build that wall you ask and I'm
here to tell you one of the town's
people comes was after him accusing him
of fraud you're a liar
Trump what about Trump's recent
assassination
attempt did anybody predict that and
then I saw an attempt on his life this
bullet flew by his ear and it came so
close to his head that it busted his
drum
[Music]
eardrum the Great American novelist Mark
Twain even predicted his own death born
on November 30th 1835 just as Haley's
Comet was passing by Earth he would
often say to people that he expected to
go out with the comet upon its return
just as he predicted he died in 1910
just one day after the comet made its
closest approach to Earth and finally
maybe the most Eerie prediction of all
Michael Richards was a talented prolific
African-American sculptor in New York
Michael Rolando Richards was a sculptor
like all of his Works were like obsessed
with flight and in the sculpture that
made him most famous he portrayed
himself as a Airman standing vertically
erect and levitating off the ground and
being impaled by airplanes and the
sculpture is called Tar baby versus St
Sebastian and St Sebastian was the
Medieval Saint who you know was always
depicted like pierced by arrows so he
depicted himself pierced by planes as a
martyr pierced by planes you know on the
basis of the strength of his work
including I assume that sculpture he was
awarded Studio space for 6 months in the
Twin Towers the lower Manhattan cultural
Council uh had been uh issuing Studios
to like a CO you know cohorts of 15
artists like for six months you know so
two cohorts a year he alone among those
artists uh had stayed in the studio the
night of September 10th and was killed
on the morning of September
[Applause]
11th the examples of modern prophecies
are endless Alex Jones say what you will
about the guy as far as so his other
beliefs but are you familiar with he he
had an on air call or if you let some
terrorist group drew it like the World
Trade Center we know who to blame and if
there was an outside threat like a Bin
Laden who was a known CIA asset in the
80s he's the boogeyman they need it's
just this absurd like you know literally
what happened I could go on forever
survivorship bias you say people make
crazy predictions pontificate all the
time if we gave air time to all of the
wrong historical predictions made we'd
be sitting here all day but then I'd
come back and I'd say but the level of
detail in many of these predictions is
beyond probability and then you might
come back and say but the probability of
a bunch of eily accurate predictions
over a long enough time scale and with
the internet at your disposal is
actually more likely than you're
presenting it Jesse we can go around in
Endless circles on these arguments how
do we get to the bottom of them
scientifically I mean it's not like the
government looked into this stuff
systematically for 20 years employing
hundreds of psychic spies to find
hostages drop nuclear basis and predict
military obstacles oh wait they did do
all of that there was in fact a CIA and
Dia backed program called Stargate which
ran from 1972 to 1995 the official
American psychic spy program every year
it got refunded because it was useful
there are hundreds of successful remote
viewing cases from the program many
coming from the program's Pride enjoy
remote viewer remote viewer number one
Joseph mcmonagle mcmonagle used remote
viewing to identify Soviet nuclear bases
predict key critical events and he even
helped locate kidnapped American General
James doer in fact mcmonagle even won
the prestigious Legion of Merit for his
work in the psychic spy program adding
to intelligence in over 200 critical
National Security cases in 1979 he was
tasked with remote viewing an
impenetrable building in a shipyard off
the coast of the White Sea in Russia he
described a massive nuclear submarine in
the works I spoke to mcmonagle's
colleague and fellow psychic spy Paul
Smith about it and everybody thought
that was crazy and it was pretty well
dismissed 8 months after that those Pro
those sessions were done the Russians
floated out the typhoon the biggest
submarine ever built and its missile
tubes were in front of the super
structure on the crazy exactly as Jo Joe
described it that same year the Russians
and the Americans were in a race trying
to find a downed tu22 Russian spy plane
in Africa there was some very precious
cargo on board highly sensitive Russian
cryptic equipment Dale graph who ran the
psychic spy program at the time had a
woman named Rosemary Smith remote view
the plane she was given all of Africa as
a possible Target she ended up drawing a
3 square mile area in zier even
President Jimmy Carter recalls this
being the most miraculous thing that
occurred during his 4-year presidential
term we located the plane where she said
it was it's the only time that I have
ever experienced something that was
inexplicable who all I was presid okay
all of that's kind of remarkable but
again real science involves collecting
large amounts of data and surely no
independent well-regarded statisticians
have looked at the Stargate psychic spy
data well that's actually not true a
statistician named Jessica UTS who was
president of the American statistical
Society reviewed all of the Stanford
Research Institute psychic spy data and
a whole lot of other psychic experiments
as well UT uh did an analysis of a lot
of uh evidence for psychic functioning
not just the Stargate program I don't
believe uh and she found overwhelming
evidence and she's been very very vocal
about this she based her studies on
basic probability specifically P values
in scientific terms this means using
statistics to compare the observed
results to what would be expected by
Chance the P value basically answers the
question if chance were the only Factor
How likely is it that we'd see results
this strong or stronger when the P value
is very small researchers are more
confident in ruling out chance as the
explanation for findings say you have
four cards face down you know one of
those cards is an ace of diamonds the
probability that you guess which card is
an ace of diamonds is 25% or has a P
value of 0.25 a commonly accepted
practice in the field of statistical
analysis is to say that A P value of
less than 5% so 05 would rule out chance
as an explanation in these cas cases
results are statistically significant
but that's not sufficient obviously low
probability things still happen just by
chance so replicating these non- chance
results across a lot of Trials and
collecting a lot of data is very
important okay hopefully you're
following me here basic probability hard
to argue with you know what makes Black
Friday and Cyber Monday so thrilling
those once a year deals that feel too
good to pass up but here's the best part
with raycon you're already getting
incredible value every day of the year
and now they're doubling down with an
offer that's hard to beat up to 30% off
sitewide I use my raycon everyday
earbuds all the time whether I'm deep in
research editing videos or just enjoying
my favorite music while exploring Austin
these earbuds are absolute game changers
they fit comfortably and securely no
matter what I'm up to and I never have
to worry about them falling out the
32-hour battery life is a lifesaver I'm
never scrambling for a charger and the
active noise cancellation is perfect for
tuning out distractions whether I'm
walking in a noisy cafe or going for a
walk the new multi-point connectivity
lets me seamlessly switch between
devices this is a must for someone
always moving between phone calls and
research on my laptop and the Quick
Charge feature is another favorite just
10 minutes of charging gives me 90
minutes of listening so it's time to
save big for Black Friday and Cyber
Monday go to by
raycon.com Jessy Michels today that's
right you'll get up to 30% off
everything on rayon's website when you
go to by ron.com
Jessie Michels Michaels spelled with no
a all right back to the show back to
Jessica UT's statistical assessment of
psychic spying first she diligence the
experimental protocols making sure that
they were sound protocols like this the
experimentor takes a set of 200
photographs sourced at random from the
pages of National Geographic Magazines
now they take a participating remote
viewer who hasn't seen seen any of these
photographs the remote viewer is then
placed in a completely isolated room
during the experiment away from the
experimenter and away from the photos
the experimentor then randomly selects a
batch of five photos acting as a kind of
Beacon or sender of the information the
remote viewer would then be tasked
withdrawing each photo that was picked
in tightly controlled conditions a well-
tested randomizer would be used to
select the photos and the experimenters
or even anybody in contact with with the
experimenters was not allowed to
communicate at all with the remote
viewer a final third person then judges
what the remote viewer draws and see how
it matches the batch of randomly
selected photos these photos are
incredibly wide ranging they could be
something like a mountain view or a cat
sleeping in a car the study of these
attempts found that there was an overall
hit rate of 35% a number that was found
to be repeatable over and over again but
there's more corroboration similar
numbers were found in the trials done at
the University of Edinburgh and the Ry
Research Institute at Duke in North
Carolina so how did Jessica UTS shake
out in her statistical study what was
her overall assessment well I'll just
quote her using the standards applied to
any other area of science it is
concluded that psychic functioning has
been well established the statistical
results of the studies examined are far
beyond what is expected by chance
arguments that these results could be
due to methodological flaws in the
experiments are soundly refuted strong
words she said you know this is the
quality of the evidence is so strong
that if it were in any other field
nobody would question this yes making
UT's conclusions even more meaningful is
the fact that she partnered with
psychologist Ray Heyman Hyman was a
total skeptic of the Paranormal going
into this and eager to find methodology
issues and other rational explanations
for the data in fact Heyman was a friend
and colleague of perhaps the most
prominent skeptic at the time James
Randy himman even wrote for the
skeptical Inquirer in fact he had
previously written a report commissioned
by the government two decades earlier
that was highly critical of the famous
psychic Yuri Geller while Heyman did
have some minor disagreements with UT he
agreed with her basic take the psychic
experiments were free of obvious flaws
and the data was too large and
consistent to be dismissed as
statistical flukes something unexplained
was going on even in heyman's skeptical
opinion but you don't need to take my
word for it the study has been made
publicly available and the report goes
into far more detail than I've covered
here the link for the PDF is in the
description of this video unfortunately
when it comes to psychic phenomena we
can't turn them into math repeatable
processes or technology so we just
conveniently ignore them even if we have
statistically significant data backing
these studies Jessica UTS actually
captured this sentiment well saying that
it would be a waste of resources to
continue to look for proof of psychic
phenomena and instead resources should
be directed to the real pressing matter
of how this ability works just look at
the history of even conventional science
we couldn't explain black body radiation
when it was discovered in the 1860s we
needed Max Plank's Quantum revolution in
1900 we also couldn't explain Mercury's
orbit with Newtonian physics we needed
Einstein's SpaceTime curvature to
accurately predict its path when we
discovered these anomalies these
observations were never fake or worthy
of being ignored we just couldn't
explain them with math or theoretical
physics at the time psychic phenomena is
just the same it's unexplainable not
always repeatable and can't be turned
into math but it's real like
statistically significant real and by
many accounts far more replicable than
Fields like psychology as the great
Arthur C Clark once said any
sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from Magic well
cutting to the chase thanks to this
week's amazing American Alchemist Eric
Wargo the ability of the mind to predict
the future in Eerie ways is increasingly
moving from Magic to science Wargo has
constructed a biological computational
and physics-based model to describe
exactly how our brains might have access
to the Future and it's not woowoo or new
Agy at all in fact while it's still
theoretical it's very hard-headed
logical and it actually makes sense even
in a materialist Universe what is
wargo's thesis your brain is a
time-traveling quantum computer okay
that sounds kind of insane but here hear
me out for a quantum computer to work it
generally needs to maintain coherence or
the ability to maintain multiple States
at once in order to do that you usually
need to maintain extremely cold
environments with very little noise or
signal interference in the system and
fortunately human and animal bodies are
full of blood water mucus and skin
they're the last thing from cold and
precise they're warm wet and noisy so
people assume our bodies don't have
Quantum capabilities but there's a new
field called Quantum biology uncovering
all sorts of biological processes that
involve Quantum effects the creation of
enzymes involves Quantum tunneling
robins and other migratory birds have a
protein in their eyes called a
cryptochrome that uses electron spin to
sense the Earth's magnetic field acting
as a Quantum compass and helping them
navigate home you have Quantum biology
you have um you know enzyme creation
using Quantum tunneling you have Birds
navig getting home using the cr4 protein
spin you have you have other examples as
well absolutely and plant photosynthesis
might depend on quantum entanglement but
what about the brain and everyday human
perception well theorists as prominent
as Nobel prizewinning physicist Roger
Penrose have hypothesized that the brain
is actually a room temperature Quantum
system what does this mean practically
and how does this allow our brains to
predict the future well in quantum
mechanics you of course have Einstein's
spooky action at a distance or spatial
non-locality everybody likes to talk
about this entangled Photon pairs across
the world seeming to mirror each other
in ways that break Einstein's speed
limit of light but to me perhaps the
even more mind-blowing thing about
quantum mechanics is that you don't just
have spatial non-locality you have
temporal non-locality spooky action
across time say you entangle two photons
with each other Photon a and Photon B
you then run the classic double slit
experiment with Photon a wait to few
days and run another double slit
experiment with Photon B if you don't
observe either Photon in the experiment
you'll get an interference pattern for
both Photon B and Photon a If You
observe Photon B in the second double
slit experiment it will collapse into a
particle State and go through one of the
slits but here's where things get crazy
it looks like the measurement and
collapse of photon B is causing the
collapsing of photon a into a particle
State 2 even though the double slit
experiment with Photon a is happening
before the experiment with Photon B in
other words the two photons are
entangled not only across space but
across time this looks a whole lot like
either retrocausality or dare I say it
time travel but this basic principle in
quantum mechanics actually probably
applies to quantum computers too in fact
instead of the bits ones and zeros that
classical computers operate on quantum
computers operate on these things called
cubits that exist in superpositional
States cubit can take on superp
positions of states right and so what a
lot of people in popular culture Popular
Science butcher when they describe super
positions is that they say that the
Cubit is both one and zero at the same
time that's not true it's not in the one
state it's not in the zero State it's
not in the one and zero State either
it's also not not in the one and not in
the zero State it's in a super position
State well it turns out that you can
actually reverse Cubit positions in
Quant Quantum computations so in a
working quantum computer it's been
hypothesized even by some of the people
building quantum computers right now
that you can send information back in
time and if the brain is a Quantum
system as Roger Penrose thinks it is
then maybe the brain can access its
future knowledge State maybe the brain
can send information back in time or
have a pre-memory if you will maybe that
explains why humans can have incredible
intuition humans in their bodies often
just instinctively know when certain
things are about to happen you come out
of the womb with like you know a fear of
snakes and with a chomski and preg
grammar for certain things and that's
not how a classical computer works
because it's that informational time
travel that's already happening you can
look at biological systems as models for
how it works uh and yeah in a quantum
computer you can theoretically scale up
the the that causal indeterminacy that's
happening on the the quantum level and
you scale that up uh in a quantum
computer server that you leave plugged
in for many years uh it really opens the
doorway to actually communicating across
time but this is a really important
distinction Wargo doesn't really believe
in woow woo mind over matter he doesn't
think a psychic can simply view a downed
airplane halfway across the world they
can only remote view that airplane if in
the future they are given confirmation
that that plane crashed in a specific
location once that knowledge state is
confirmed in stored in the person's
brain it could be sent back in time
feedback may be important Beyond just
training remote viewers that you know
maybe
maybe maybe that's what remote viewers
are really seeing they're seeing that
feedback in the future that's really
interesting point I actually spoke with
the founder of the CIA psychic spy
program Hal put off he was very open to
Wargo being right that confirmatory
feedback is required for the remote
viewing to work and there's actually a
reason to believe that the ability to
send information back in time would be
extremely adaptive for survival
explaining why humans are most intuitive
around life and death situations penr
just has a theory and he's a theoretical
physicist not an experimentalist what
evidence do we actually have that the
brain might be a Quantum system well
penrose's collaborator anesthesiologist
steuart Hammer off thinks he has a
candidate tiny cylindrical structures
found in the cytoplasm of plant and
animal cells called microtubules these
structures have tiny indle Rings
distributed throughout tubulin that
hamov thinks could maintain Quantum
coherence when you turn the microtubules
off with anesthesia the rest of the
brain functions completely normally it's
only the microtubules that shut off and
the person becomes unconscious it's
almost as if these micro structures are
the on and off switches to our conscious
perception the Penrose thing you know
this idea that he he wrote in the
emperor's new mind that the microtubules
um I guess that was the fall but the
emperor's new mind with hammer off the
microtubule is our Quantum sensor that
collapses the wave function into an igen
State I have some sympathy for going
along that direction so you think
there's some sort of quantum sensor in
the in the brain and do you have a top
candidate for the specific structure
well I can't rule it out I mean they
certainly started from a very
fundamental thing is and that is if you
can get rid of Consciousness by using an
anesthetic then however you're doing it
must have something to do with
Consciousness but we have microtubules
throughout the body where in the brain
would Quantum processing actually be
happening I give you Gary Nolan a
tenyear Stanford Professor who believes
that the neuronal density in the kodate
and paman of the brain's basil ganglia
determines a person's psychic ability in
fact if you hook an fmri up to the brain
and track a person's blood flow while
they're playing the game of Go it seems
like this part of the brain the kodate
nucleus in paman lights up when a person
makes a move purely based on intuition
in fact these moves often seem
irrational when they're made but they
somehow work out for the players that
make them in looking at the MRIs of some
of these people we noticed a area of the
brain that seemed to be disturbed let's
say or different in many of these
individuals uh so it's an area that I've
talked about before between the head of
the CATE and the paman that had
increased neural density and it was
larger than all these individuals and so
you asked the question okay what's
unique about these individuals well
they're all highly functioning and you
have to make snap decisions what is that
that's intuition one way to explain it
would be Intuition or just highly
intelligent and then surprisingly when
we looked in the family members we found
that the family members had it mhm which
was fascinating so that means that
structure had a genetic component that's
I think how the brain works via
intuition have you ever made a decision
in your life that feels totally
irrational incrementally like with the
data you have it makes no sense but it
makes sense in the context of an end
point that you know happens later to me
that is your future knowledge State
sending information back in time that
system is part of the reward system um
and so it's it's involved in our uh
registration of rewards our learning
based on rewards our predictions based
on past rewards
um uh and that system system I think is
Central you know it's Central it's kind
of the Central classically in that
classical computer uh model uh in terms
of the organism you know changing its
Behavior based on rewards and getting
excited about possible future rewards
and anticipated rewards and all that
thanks to this week's amazing American
Alchemist Eric Wargo the ability of the
mind to predict the future in Eerie ways
is increasingly moving from Magic to
science we should definitely study the
microtubules in the cadate nucleus in
paman that could be the specific part of
the brain responsible for intuition and
responsible for sending future Quantum
information back in time but there's
more evidence have you heard of a
Russian scientist with the last name
liberman two friends of mine denil and
David liberman their father knew uh
hamov and or I think knew Penrose rather
and was uh really interested in
cytoskeletal learning fim Libra is the
father of my two friends David and denil
Lieberman and he was the foremost
researcher in Consciousness in the
Soviet Union in the 70s and 80s even
before Penrose was doing his work epim
conjectured that Quantum effects in
which cytoskeletal membranes of cells
which is where the microtubules exist
communicate to one another and even
encode semantic information a lot of
this is centered around an experiment he
did with goldfish he took four goldfish
the first he just froze right off the
bat with nitrogen the second he spun in
a centrifuge and then froze the fish
with nitrogen while spinning it the
third he would spin in a centrifuge then
give the fish a little time to reorient
and then freeze it with nitrogen and
finally he put the fourth fish to sleep
spun it in a centrifuge and then froze
it he then let the frozen fish thaw back
to room temperature keeping them alive
and letting them swim around after the
experiment what he found was nothing
short of fascinating basically all of
the fish had their cytos skeletons and
neurons intact and they could all
continue swimming and navigating the
water normally except for the second
fish that poor fish's cytoskeletons had
completely disassembled because the
nitrogen had Frozen it while it was
being spun around and so when it was
brought back to normal temperature it
couldn't swim normally at all it
couldn't compute its environment or
calculate where it was spatially just
another point for cytoskeleton and
microtubules being essential for
conscious awareness I think we have to
be open to this quum you know prec
cognizance of The Future model
absolutely I mean I think that uh you
know steuart Hammer off I'm sure you
know his work on microtubules I think
that's you know that's going to be the I
think microtubules are probably going to
be the the mechanism here a lot of
people simplistically say oh the brain
is a quantum computer it's not that
simple it's a it's a hybrid it's a
hybrid of classical and Quantum systems
you know meshed in the world of constant
hype around artificial intelligence I
hope you come out of this episode with
new faith that the human mind will be
very hard to replace with robots sorry
Optimus yeah we might lose to them at
chess our recall isn't as good and we'll
never be able to do mental math as fast
as a calculator but we can predict the
future so let's lean into our very human
differences and develop this Sixth Sense
what is at least for now our unbeatable
intuition as the great Marshall mclen
once said every media extension of man
is an amputation if our brains are in
fact quantum computers we shouldn't
merge with classical computers we should
rigorously investigate the growing field
of quantum biology and not let the cult
of Silicon Valley transhumanism or the
desire to escape our human bandwidth
limitations make us Overlook the magic
of our own biology so this interview
with Eric Wargo was an absolute blast I
felt like I needed to turn this part
into a video essay the concepts here are
so complex that I felt like they needed
to be kind of cogently synthesized there
are all sorts of crazy stuff that we
spoke about in our interview that we
didn't get into in this essay here I
just wanted to flesh out the basic
concepts and make a scientific
compelling case for how the mind works
that is distinct from artificial
intelligence and classical computers I
also wanted to make a case for psychic
functioning to Scientific Skeptics but
stay tuned for my completely unfiltered
raw conversation with Eric Wargo that's
going to come in about a week we get
into all sorts of other crazy stuff it's
going to be a lot of fun until next week
my name is Jesse Michaels and this is
American Alchemy